Integrating AI Planning with Natural Language Processing:
A Combination of Explicit and Tacit Knowledge
KEBING JIN and HANKZ HANKUI ZHUO∗, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun
Yat-sen University, China
Natural language processing (NLP) aims at investigating the interactions between agents and humans, pro-
cessing and analyzing large amounts of natural language data. Large-scale language models play an important
role in current natural language processing. However, the challenges of explainability and complexity come
along with the developments of language models. One way is to introduce logical relations and rules into
natural language processing models, such as making use of Automated Planning. Automated planning (AI
planning) focuses on building symbolic domain models and synthesizing plans to transit initial states to goals
based on domain models. Recently, there have been plenty of works related to these two fields, which have
the abilities to generate explicit knowledge, e.g., preconditions and effects of action models, and learn from
tacit knowledge, e.g., neural models, respectively. Integrating AI planning and natural language processing
effectively improves the communication between human and intelligent agents. This paper outlines the
commons and relations between AI planning and natural language processing, argues that each of them can
effectively impact on the other one by five areas: (1) planning-based text understanding, (2) planning-based
natural language processing, (3) planning-based explainability, (4) text-based human-robot interaction, and
(5) applications. We also explore some potential future issues between AI planning and natural language
processing. To the best of our knowledge, this survey is the first work that addresses the deep connections
between AI planning and Natural language processing.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Natural language processing; Planning and schedul-
ing; Information extraction; Natural language generation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: AI planning, Natural language processing, Natural language understanding,
Human-robot interaction, Explainability
ACM Reference Format:
Kebing Jin and Hankz Hankui Zhuo. 2022. Integrating AI Planning with Natural Language Processing: A
Combination of Explicit and Tacit Knowledge. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 1, 1 (April 2022), 24 pages.
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
Natural language processing (NLP) aims at investigating the interactions between agents and
humans, processing and analyzing large amounts of natural language data. In recent years, for
attaining better performance and handling large corpora, building large-scale language models
is an inevitable trend in real applications [62, 78, 126 ]. Despite the success of language models in
various domains, the explainability and complexity of language models have drawn intense research
interests recently. In order to make models explainable and lightweight, integrating models with
symbolic planning has been demonstrated effective in various NLP tasks. Symbolic planning (AI
planning) is a branch of artificial intelligence that focuses on building symbolic domain models and
synthesizing plans to transit initial states to goals based on domain models. The plans are typically
for execution by intelligent agents, autonomous robots, and unmanned vehicles. Different from
classical control and classification problems, the solutions are complex and must be discovered and
optimized in multidimensional space. Generally, those approaches are mostly based on structured
data, which has a well-defined structure and logically explainable to humans.
Compared with structured data used in AI planning, natural language descriptions are often
complicated by omissions, inverted order, etc., resulting in difficulties in reasoning about language
descriptions. It is thus often hard to directly train neural models to generate available and correct
solutions, although deep learning has been widely used to handle unstructured data. Deep learning
methods do well in acquiring knowledge from data, capturing implied rules, and expressing them
by mathematical and neural models, which are tacit and unable to be directly shared with other
humans and agents. Different from deep learning methods that aim to learn tacit knowledge,
planning-based methods are better at capturing changes, formalizing them by rules, and generating
valid plans when handling structured data. Rules are already codified, namely explicit knowledge,
which can be clearly expressed and easily shared with others. Therefore, AI planning is one of the
considerable steps to understand implied rules and build domain models from large amount of texts
in natural language processing [32, 72].
On the other hand, unstructured data in real world is not disorderly but often a sequence based
on rules. As for a natural language description, there is a theme running through it, along with a
series of relevant events and a coherent text unfolds. Each sentence relates to the preceding texts
and influences following sentences, just like preconditions and effects of actions in AI planning. For
example, in a recipe about making a meatloaf shown in Figure 1(a), humans can easily understand it
and capture the main information including verbs, e.g., “Heat”, and objects, e.g., “butter” and “skillet”.
However, as for agents, when given a mass of data in the form of sentences, it is hard to directly build
models to reason about the implied rules and predict next moves. If we extract these information and
formalize them structurally, as shown in Figure 1(b), it is easier to construct models based on planning
methods for guiding future unseen tasks.
Besides using AI planning to help reason about implied rules in texts, the power of AI planning
about capturing implied relations and computing valid solutions is another effective way to improve
natural language processing, such as text summarization and machine translation. For example,
there have been planning-based text generation methods [ 57 , 119 ] extending a clear storyline
ordered in advance. Those methods first compute sequences composed of keywords, key phrases,
or contents as storylines, then use natural language processing techniques to extend storylines
to coherent texts. In the above-mentioned example, generating an available recipe in a correct order
shown in Figure 1(a) is hard. However, given some rules, such as domain models about the operations
of cooking, agents can compute plans toward achieving specified goals like a theme about making a
meatloaf, as shown in Figure 1(b). Agents can easily extend the plan and gain a valid recipe.
The integration of AI planning and natural language processing combines the best of tacit
knowledge learning from sentences and explicit knowledge in the form of rules. As discussed
in [ 52], it would be more effective to combine explicit and tacit knowledge rather than giving
up explicit knowledge and learning everything from tacit knowledge, which is the current trend.
Integrating AI planning and natural language processing allows human to communicate with
agents in a more comfortable way, and enables intelligent agents to explain themselves to human
in a human-understandable way. Natural language, as the most comfortable way to communicate
with humans, establishes a relationship between humans and intelligent agents. In recent years,
researchers have made efforts to connect with natural language and robots, such as by dialogue
systems [ 82, 105 ] and natural language commands understanding [59, 108 ]. On the other hand,
planning-based natural language models are based on structured data or implied rules, such as
predicted storylines, which allows human to partly understand the principles of models.
In this paper, we first introduce some background knowledge in AI planning and natural language
processing as well as their relations. Then we give a comprehensive overview of integrating AI
planning and natural language processing by four aspects and their challenges: planning-based text
understanding, planning-based natural language processing, planning-based explainability, and
text-based human-robot interaction. Their relations are shown in Figure 2. Firstly, planning-based
natural language understanding includes extracting actions from texts and learning domain models
from texts. Secondly, we introduce planning-based natural language processing by three tasks
integrated with AI planning, i.e., text generation, text summarization, and machine translation. Then
we discuss planning-based explainability. Next, we introduce text-based human-robot interaction by
extracting actions from natural language instructions, natural language command understanding,
and dialogue generation. Finally, we present current applications, several future directions and
conclude this paper. To the best of our knowledge, this survey is the first work that addresses the
deep connections between AI planning and NLP.

Integrating AI Planning with Natural Language Processing: A Combination of Explicit and Tacit Knowledge 17
feedback, make planning decisions, and respond intelligently. On the other hand, the navigation
systems in daily use, such as Baidu Maps 4 and Google Maps 5, combine making decisions and
NLP techniques, which plan out routes with different objectives according to goals, and generate
natural language suggestions to guide human. Moreover, agents learn from human commands and
navigation datasets, helping agents understand human behaviors [45, 73].
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we consider that AI planning and natural language processing have strong ties, and we
introduce recent works about four related tasks, i.e., planning-based text understanding, planning-
based natural language processing, planning-based explainability, and text-based human-robot
interaction. We first introduce backgrounds about AI planning and natural language processing
and discuss commons between them, as well as their abilities to generate explicit knowledge,
e.g., domain models, and learning from tacit knowledge, e.g., neural models. We then introduce
methods of planning-based text understanding by extracting action sequences from texts and
learning domain models from texts. Next, we give an overview of planning-based natural language
processing about text generation, text summarization, and machine translation. Then, we introduce
recent works in planning-based explainability and text-based human-robot interaction.
With this paper, we aim to provide a high-level view of AI planning and natural language
processing for further studies, about integrating them for a combination of explicit and tacit
knowledge. Combining learning from tacit knowledge and using explicit knowledge in a fully
principled way is an open problem, although there are non-negligible relations between AI planning
and natural language processing, allowing each of them can effectively impact the other one.
However, there is not enough communication between these two fields. While many advances have
been made in natural language processing by using AI planning algorithms, a significant amount
of research is still required to understand the implied knowledge hidden in texts. Meanwhile,
improving the ability to describe environments by domain models and solve large-scale planning
problems is also beneficial to understanding texts and generating coherent and interesting texts.
We believe that integrating AI planning and natural language processing, a complex combination of
explicit and tacit knowledge, is a promising research area, which can improve the communication
between human and intelligent agents.