ABSTRACT Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a fast-growing area of study that stretching its presence to many
business and research domains. Machine learning, deep learning, and natural language processing (NLP)
are subsets of AI to tackle different areas of data processing and modelling. This review article presents an
overview of AI’s impact on education outlining with current opportunities. In the education domain, student
feedback data is crucial to uncover the merits and demerits of existing services provided to students. AI can
assist in identifying the areas of improvement in educational infrastructure, learning management systems,
teaching practices and study environment. NLP techniques play a vital role in analyzing student feedback in
textual format. This research focuses on existing NLP methodologies and applications that could be adapted
to educational domain applications like sentiment annotations, entity annotations, text summarization, and
topic modelling. Trends and challenges in adopting NLP in education were reviewed and explored. Context-
based challenges in NLP like sarcasm, domain-specific language, ambiguity, and aspect-based sentiment
analysis are explained with existing methodologies to overcome them. Research community approaches to
extract the semantic meaning of emoticons and special characters in feedback which conveys user opinion
and challenges in adopting NLP in education are explored.
INDEX TERMS Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing, Education, Deep Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a fast-growing topic with
its cognitive human-like intelligence in building decision-
making systems. AI can revolutionize education with its
capacity for prediction and classification by processing huge
amounts of structured data sets such as SQL databases
and unstructured datasets such as videos and audios. AI
introduces machine learning methodologies to personalize
the student learning experience via learning management
systems [1], deep learning, and transfer learning to use
pre-trained concepts to deal with new similar problems [2],
natural language processing (NLP) methods [3] to listen to
student feedback, process them and output predictive in-
sights on their opinion towards learning infrastructure. AI
can transform existing educational infrastructures [4] namely
online tutoring, learning management systems, curriculum,
employment transitions, teacher training, assessments, and
research training. The institutional project data are diverse
and inclusive of student feedback in textual format class-
room recordings in video and audio formats.
Chassignol et al. [5] defined AI as an “Artificial Intelli-
gence is that activity devoted to making machines intelligent,
and intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to
function appropriately and with foresight in its environment”.
Educational institutions have extensively adopted AI in dif-
ferent forms of service delivery to students [6]. One of
the most widely used AI methodologies for student opinion
mining is NLP [7]. It plays a key role in interpreting feedback
or opinions of end-users. Most institutions in the world invest
their time and resources to understand end-users’ feedback.
NLP can read the feedback in most languages without much
human intervention and can analyze textual data and unwrap
the end-user perception and opinion on a service, product,
or human. In recent years, NLP has been applied to review
movies, books, gadgets and so on [8]. Topic modelling tech-
niques are part of NLP to read text corpus and can summa-
rize, annotate or categorize text documents. Furthermore, it
uses various techniques like part-of-speech (POS) tagging to
understand the context of words.
Eggert [9] discussed the opportunities of AI in education.
The author proposed an AI method to improve teaching
methods by collecting vast amounts of data related to each
student’s prior knowledge, emotional state, or economic
background and adjusting the teaching approach through
adaptive learning platforms (ALP). Intelligent tutoring sys-
tems (ITS) is one of the ALP components. With automa-
tion of repeated tasks would allow teaching staff to design
new instructional approach and focus on non-routine work.
The other opportunity discussed in that article is to expose
students to some AI-driven tools to cope with the future
labour world that is highly dependent on technologies and
focus on lifelong learning via improved access to Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs). AI can enhance student’s
learning experience in MOOCs by identifying areas where
personalized guidance is required. Holstein et al. [10] also
stressed the need for personalized guidance to students in
their work on AI-enhanced classrooms. Using participatory
speed dating (PSD) [11], the authors found real-time support
was needed from the AI system to identify when a student
needs a human’s help for motivation. Holstein et al. [12]
also focused on the challenges of involving non-technical
stakeholders due to the complexity of learning analytics
systems [13]. The authors proposed Konscia, a wearable
and real-time awareness tool for teachers working in AI-
enhanced K-12 classrooms. In addition, they demonstrated
the process of non-technical stakeholders’ participation in
designing a complex learning analytics system. Alrajhi et
al. [14] stressed the need to analyse student feedback or
comments in MOOC as it would help to understand the
student need for intervention from instructors.
Chen et al. [6] surveyed the impact of AI on education. The
authors discussed the technical aspects of AI in education:
assessment of students and schools, grading and evaluating
papers and exams, smart schools, personalized intelligent
teaching, online and mobile remote education. Their study
scope was confined to the application and effects of AI in
administration, teaching, and learning. To enable instructors
and teachers with effective grading capabilities, an adap-
tive learning method was used in applications of Knewton
and ensured a continuous student improvement in learn-
ing [15]. Applications like Grammarly, Ecree, Paper-Rater
and Turnitin leverage AI to assist educational institutions and
teachers in performing plagiarism checks, typographical and
grammatical error checks. The student learning experience is
an essential aspect of the education domain. AI enables an
adaptive learning system for students based on their back-
grounds to assist in tracking their learning progression and
enhance the system to customize the content according to
student’s needs to leverage a personalized system. A quick
interactive system using AI would reduce the gap between
students and educational providers and assist in listening to
students’ opinions and queries.
With the extensive research being conducted in analyzing
AI’s impact on education [16], [17] and discovering the op-
portunities in the education domain, educational institutions
have focused on building a cognitive intelligent system using
AI. In this process, the foremost step is to listen to students’
opinions and feedback on existing educational infrastructure,
teaching practices, and learning environments. In academic
institutions, it is traditional practice to request student feed-
back to gather students’ perception of the teaching team and
their learning experience in the course. The student feedback
could be in quantitative or qualitative formats, using numer-
ical answers to rate the performance or textual comments
to questions [18]. Monitoring and tracking students’ feed-
back manually is a time-consuming and resource-demanding
task. NLP can contribute to this task with its annotation
and summarization capabilities. This study reviewed NLP
methodologies that can contribute to the education domain,
and the following research questions were explored:
• What are the existing methodologies being used for
NLP?
• What are the generic challenges of using NLP in the
education domain?
• What are the current trends of NLP in student feedback
analysis?
• How can NLP methodology in other disciplines be
adopted to the education domain?
Machine learning and deep learning are part of AI method-
ologies. Machine learning is a set of algorithms can ana-
lyze data, learn and apply. Deep learning techniques holds
multi-layer neural network with processing layers to train
new concepts and link to previously known concepts. Deep
learning enhances NLP with concepts like continuous-bag-
of-words and skip-gram model. Convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs) [19], recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
their special cases of long short-term memory (LSTM) and
gated recurrent units (GRUs) are different forms of deep
learning techniques used in text classification [20] [21]. In
this article, existing works using the AI methodologies to
analyze text data are explored. Although few research works
are not directly related to student feedback, the methods can
be adopted to students’ feedback analysis.
The contributions of this research are as follows:
• Enhanced understanding of the impact of AI on educa-
tion with open opportunities in the industry. • Synthesis of existing NLP methodologies to student
user feedback and annotate their views.
• Exploring trends and challenges in NLP that need to be
addressed to be adopted to the education domain.
The remainder of the paper is organized into sections.
Section II defined feature extraction, feature selection, and
topic modelling techniques with other researchers’ work.
Text evaluation techniques like summarization, knowledge
graphs, annotation, existing NLP methodologies being used
for NLP are defined. In Section III, challenges in adopting
NLP in the education domain are discussed. Section IV
presents a discussion on this work. The article concludes
with limitations and future work of the study presented in
Section V

V. CONCLUSIONS
The aim of the study is to explore existing NLP method-
ologies that can be implemented or adopted in education
domain. This assist to understand AI impact on education
with open opportunities, synthesize the methods to process
student feedback, and annotate their views. The literature re-
view has been performed using Google Scholar covering bib-
liographic databases such as Wiley, Scopus, Springer, ACM
Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Pub-Med, Science Direct, and
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI) and so
FIGURE 9. Year-wise References Distribution
FIGURE 10. References Distribution
on. The search results of Google Scholar were manually
checked for relevance NLP techniques in student feedback
or education applications that can be adopted to the feedback
analysis. For example, Twitter data analysis which consists
of short text analysis using NLP similar student feedback. As
shown in Figure 9, the majority of the references included in
this study are from the last 5 years. Also, more than 90%
percent of the citation included in this study are journal
articles and conference papers. Table 2 presents the NLP
techniques explored in this study and corresponding research
community works citations.
In this review article, the impact of AI on education was
discussed. The scope of introducing AI into educational
institutions is detailed based on the opportunities. Limiting
the scope of introducing NLP methodologies to education
for feedback analysis in this article, existing NLP method-
ologies were explored. Feature extraction, feature selection
and topic modelling methodologies were explained with brief
definitions. Further to this, text evaluation techniques text
summarization, annotation, and knowledge graphs were re-
viewed. Each of these applications was defined and existing
approaches were discussed. Challenges in adopting NLP
methodologies to the education domain were reviewed. The
limitation of this research is that this study is confined to AI
implementation methodologies with less focus on pedagogy
concepts. Data specific challenges like data scarcity and class
imbalance were not discussed. This would affect the model
learning for deep learning algorithms, which are data hungry.
Strategies to interpret deep learning models (black box) were
not explored. The future direction of this research would
be to explore data challenges while extracting feedback or
opinions without affecting privacy.