Abstract
Today, intelligent systems that offer artificial intelligence capabilities often rely on machine learning. Machine learning describes
the capacity of systems to learn from problem-specific training data to automate the process of analytical model building and
solve associated tasks. Deep learning is a machine learning concept based on artificial neural networks. For many applications,
deep learning models outperform shallow machine learning models and traditional data analysis approaches. In this article, we
summarize the fundamentals of machine learning and deep learning to generate a broader understanding of the methodical
underpinning of current intelligent systems. In particular, we provide a conceptual distinction between relevant terms and
concepts, explain the process of automated analytical model building through machine learning and deep learning, and discuss
the challenges that arise when implementing such intelligent systems in the field of electronic markets and networked business.
These naturally go beyond technological aspects and highlight issues in human-machine interaction and artificial intelligence
servitization.

Introduction
It is considered easier to explain to a child the nature of what
constitutes a sports car as opposed to a normal car by showing
him or her examples, rather than trying to formulate explicit
rules that define a sports car.
Similarly, instead of codifying knowledge into computers,
machine learning (ML) seeks to automatically learn
meaningful relationships and patterns from examples and ob-
servations (Bishop 2006). Advances in ML have enabled the
recent rise of intelligent systems with human-like cognitive
capacity that penetrate our business and personal life and
shape the networked interactions on electronic markets in ev-
ery conceivable way, with companies augmenting decision-
making for productivity, engagement, and employee retention
(Shrestha et al. 2021), trainable assistant systems adapting to
individual user preferences (Fischer et al. 2020), and trading
agents shaking traditional finance trading markets (Jayanth
Balaji et al. 2018).
The capacity of such systems for advanced problem solv-
ing, generally termed artificial intelligence (AI), is based on
analytical models that generate predictions, rules, answers,
recommendations, or similar outcomes. First attempts to build
analytical models relied on explicitly programming known
relationships, procedures, and decision logic into intelligent
systems through handcrafted rules (e.g., expert systems for
medical diagnoses) (Russell and Norvig 2021). Fueled by
the practicability of new programming frameworks, data
availability, and the broad access to necessary computing
power, analytical models are nowadays increasingly built
using what is generally referred to as ML (Brynjolfsson and
McAfee 2017; Goodfellow et al. 2016). ML relieves the hu-
man of the burden to explicate and formalize his or her
knowledge into a machine-accessible form and allows to de-
velop intelligent systems more efficiently.
During the last decades, the field of ML has brought forth a
variety of remarkable advancements in sophisticated learning
algorithms and efficient pre-processing techniques. One of
these advancements was the evolution of artificial neural net-
works (ANNs) towards increasingly deep neural network ar-
chitectures with improved learning capabilities summarized as
deep learning (DL) (Goodfellow et al. 2016; LeCun et al.
2015). For specific applications in closed environments, DL
already shows superhuman performance by excelling human
capabilities (Madani et al. 2018; Silver et al. 2018). However,
such benefits also come at a price as there are several chal-
lenges to overcome for successfully implementing analytical
models in real business settings. These include the suitable
choice from manifold implementation options, bias and drift
in data, the mitigation of black-box properties, and the reuse of
preconfigured models (as a service).
Beyond its hyped appearance, scholars, as well as profes-
sionals, require a solid understanding of the underlying con-
cepts, processes as well as challenges for implementing such
technology. Against this background, the goal of this article is
to convey a fundamental understanding of ML and DL in the
context of electronic markets. In this way, the community can
benefit from these technological achievements – be it for the
purpose of examining large and high-dimensional data assets
collected in digital ecosystems or for the sake of designing
novel intelligent systems for electronic markets. Following
recent advances in the field, this article focuses on analytical
model building and challenges of implementing intelligent
systems based on ML and DL. As we examine the field from
a technical perspective, we do not elaborate on the related
issues of AI technology adoption, policy, and impact on orga-
nizational culture (for further implications cf. e.g. Stone et al.
2016).
In the next section, we provide a conceptual distinction
between relevant terms and concepts. Subsequently, we shed
light on the process of automated analytical model building
by highlighting the particularities of ML and DL. Then, we
proceed to discuss several induced challenges when
implementing intelligent systems within organizations or
electronic markets. In doing so, we highlight environmental
factors of implementation and application rather than view-
ing the engineered system itself as the only unit of observa-
tion. We summarize the article with a brief conclusion.

Conclusion
With this fundamentals article, we provide a broad introduc-
tion to ML and DL. Often subsumed as AI technology, both
fuel the analytical models underlying contemporary and future
intelligent systems. We have conceptualized ML, shallow
ML, and DL as well as their algorithms and architectures.
Further, we have described the general process of automated
analytical model building with its four aspects of data input,
feature extraction, model building, and model assessment.
Lastly, we contribute to the ongoing diffusion into electronics
markets by discussing four fundamental challenges for intel-
ligent systems based on ML and DL in real-world ecosystems.
Here, in particular, AIaaS constitutes a new and unexplored
electronic market and will heavily influence other established
service platforms. They will, for example, augment the smart-
ness of so-called smart services by providing new ways to learn
from customer data and provide advice or instructions to them
without being explicitly programmed to do so. We estimate that
much of the upcoming research on electronic markets will be
against the backdrop of AIaaS and their ecosystems and devise
new applications, roles, and business models for intelligent sys-
tems based on DL. Related future research will need to address
and factor in the challenges we presented by providing struc-
tured methodological guidance to build analytical models, as-
sess data collections and model performance, and make predic-
tions safe and accessible to the user.