Abstract. Pose estimation has promised to impact healthcare by en-
abling more practical methods to quantify nuances of human move-
ment and biomechanics. However, despite the inherent connection be-
tween pose estimation and biomechanics, these disciplines have largely
remained disparate. For example, most current pose estimation bench-
marks use metrics such as Mean Per Joint Position Error, Percentage
of Correct Keypoints, or mean Average Precision to assess performance,
without quantifying kinematic and physiological correctness - key aspects
for biomechanics. To alleviate this challenge, we develop OpenCapBench
to offer an easy-to-use unified benchmark to assess common tasks in hu-
man pose estimation, evaluated under physiological constraints. Open-
CapBench computes consistent kinematic metrics through joints angles
provided by an open-source musculoskeletal modeling software (Open-
Sim). Through OpenCapBench, we demonstrate that current pose esti-
mation models use keypoints that are too sparse for accurate biomechan-
ics analysis. To mitigate this challenge, we introduce SynthPose, a new
approach that enables finetuning of pre-trained 2D human pose models
to predict an arbitrarily denser set of keypoints for accurate kinematic
analysis through the use of synthetic data. Incorporating such finetun-
ing on synthetic data of prior models leads to twofold reduced joint
angle errors. Moreover, OpenCapBench allows users to benchmark their
own developed models on our clinically relevant cohort. Overall, Open-
CapBench bridges the computer vision and biomechanics communities,
aiming to drive simultaneous advances in both areas.
1 Introduction
A major part of kinematic biomechanical analysis is the study of joint angles
that are critical for understanding the interplay between body segments for use
in applications ranging from diagnostics [2,10,37] and intervention strategies [38]
to optimizing athletic performance [25]. Traditionally, acquiring high-quality
kinematic data for research and clinical studies requires a dedicated gait lab-
oratory with synchronized high-speed cameras, application of multiple optical
motion markers, and expert personnel trained in biomechanics. These cumber-
some requirements make clinical assessment and large-scale clinical trials cost-
prohibitive. Meanwhile, in the domain of computer vision, pose estimation mod-
els strive to capture and predict human movement from single or multiple videos.
Yet, despite the clear intersections in the objectives of the biomechanics and pose
estimation domains, there remains a disconnect in their methodologies and eval-
uations. Importantly, biomechanical models for estimating kinematics constrain
joints to move in physiologically realistic ways. For example, while biomechanics
researchers constrain movement of the knee to only have one degree-of-freedom
joint [13], computer vision approaches use physiologically implausible uncon-
strained three degree-of-freedom motion [34].
Evaluating kinematic metrics is not only important in clinical and sports
biomechanics, but can also improve machine learning approaches to pose estima-
tion [11]. Using more physiologic joints may serve as a form of regularization, thus
improving estimated poses. Furthermore, kinematic metrics provide a richer,
temporally consistent, and functionally relevant evaluation compared to tradi-
tional pose estimation metrics like Mean Per Joint Position Error (MPJPE) [17],
Percentage of Correct Keypoints (PCK) or mean Average Precision (mAP) [51].
Kinematic metrics such as Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of joint angle
better encapsulate the complexities and constraints of human motion, and by
emphasizing these metrics, models might generalize more effectively across di-
verse and out-of-distribution poses, view angles, and occlusions [18, 20].
Biomechanical studies [44] show that popular computer vision-based pose
estimation models and datasets with sparse keypoint annotations only on joint
centers [8, 27] result in large errors in joint angles. These errors are likely owing
to the fact that only estimating joint centers leaves identifying specific joint
angle contributions from the three anatomical axes unconstrained. Therefore,
while typical computer vision metrics focused on keypoints accuracy might be
satisfactory, specific joint kinematics can still have large errors, illustrating the
need for improved benchmarks and metrics of pose estimation.
Connecting the realms of biomechanical kinematic analysis and pose esti-
mation with computer vision can benefit both fields. Tighter integration can
provide real-world benchmarks for computer vision researchers, while translat-
ing promising pose estimation models into clinical practice can benefit biome-
chanics researchers. Against this backdrop, our work aims to bridge the current
separation between these disciplines. Our contributions are as follows:
– We introduce OpenCapBench, a benchmark to align the fields of biome-
chanics and pose estimation. OpenCapBench includes a fully automated
pipeline to streamline the transfer from pose estimation results to the
widely-used musculoskeletal modeling and simulation software OpenSim [41].
This integration allows computer vision experts to seamlessly generate kine-
matic analyses, without requiring expertise in musculoskeletal biomechanical
modeling.
– We introduce SynthPose, a novel method that uses synthetic data to
allow efficient finetuning of pretrained pose estimation models to
predict a denser set of keypoints and improve biomechanical analysis.
– Using our new kinematic benchmark, we show that compared to sparse
keypoints, our Synthpose method twofold reduces average joint angle
RMSE and up to fourfold for certain biomechanically-relevant body joints.
The benchmarking pipeline and the different components of SynthPose will be
available here.
In uniting the strengths of biomechanics and computer vision, we envision a
future where pose estimation models are not just technically proficient, but can
also help improve human movement analysis and human health outcomes.

OpenCapBench represents a step towards integrating kinematics and pose es-
timation, while introducing SynthPose, a method for estimating arbitrary key-
points which benefits both fields. This approach yields detailed insights into
the performance of pose estimation models and the importance of diverse and
comprehensive training data in refining these models.
Despite the benefits of OpenCapBench, the current dataset diversity within
OpenCapBench currently lacks breadth in terms of subject variety, environmen-
tal settings, and the range of activities covered, which will be a focus of future
work. Integrating additional datasets which use MoCap as ground truth such as
MoYo [43] or PSU-TMM100 [39] may extend the benchmark’s applicability and
relevance across broader kinematic studies.
At present, OpenCapBench primarily focuses on lower body kinematics.
Adding upper body kinematics and including upper limb assessments could help
characterize more holistic view of human motion.
While we focused on 2D pose estimation, we envision that Synthpose could
benefit monocular 3D models as well, since they similarly suffer from keypoint
scarcity as 2D models. We hope to work on such problems in the future or
encourage the community to do so.
Finally, the open-source aspect and the versatility of OpenCapBench presents
an opportunity for the community to engage with it through other pose estima-
tion tasks such as 3D keypoint estimation and temporal predictions, as well as
testing different subsets of keypoints and experimenting with new setups for
inverse kinematics. This aspect encourages a collaborative approach, inviting
contributions that could further the field of computer vision and kinematic anal-
ysis through the use of OpenCapBench.